In this video, you're going to
learn about cosine similarity,
which is another type
of similarity function.
It basically makes use of
the cosine of the angle
between two vectors.
Based on that, it tells you
whether two vectors
are close or not.
In this section, you will see
the problem of using
Euclidean distance,
especially when comparing
vector representations
of documents or corpora,
and how the cosine similarity
metric could help you
overcome this problem.
To illustrate how the
Euclidean distance
might be problematic,
let's take the
following example.
Suppose that you are in
a vector space where
the corpora are
represented by the occurrence
of the words disease and eggs.
Here's the representation
of a food corpus,
and agriculture corpus,
and the history corpus.
Each one of these corpora have
texts related to that subject.
But you know that
the word totals
in the corpora differ
from one another.
In fact, the agriculture and
the history corpus have a
similar number of words,
while the food corpus has
a relatively small number.
Let's define the Euclidean
distance between
the food and the
agriculture corpus as
d_1 and let's the
Euclidean distance between
the agriculture and the
history corpus be d_2.
As you can see, the distance d_2
is smaller than
the distance d_1,
which would suggest that
the agriculture and history
corpora are more similar than
the agriculture
and food corpora.
Another common method for
determining the
similarity between
vectors is computing the
cosine of their inner angle.
If the angle is small,
the cosine would
be close to one.
As the angle
approaches 90 degrees,
the cosine approaches zero.
As you can see here, the
angle Alpha between food and
agriculture is smaller than
the angle Beta between
agriculture and history.
In this particular case,
the cosine of those angles
is a better proxy of
similarity between these
vector representations
than their Euclidean distance.
Now you're familiar with
the main intuition
behind the use of
the cosine similarity
as a metric to
compare the similarity between
two vector representations.
Remember that the main
advantage of this metric over
the Euclidean distance
is that it isn't
biased by the size difference
between the representations.
Soon, you'll get the chance to
actually calculate this metric.
In this video, you learned why
the cosine similarity
metric is useful.
If you have two documents
of very different sizes,
then taking the Euclidean
distance is not ideal.
The cosine similarity
used the angle between
the documents and is thus
not dependent on the
size of the corpuses.